docs: Expand Metrics Drilldown docs for G12 release (#209)
grafana/metrics-drilldown: docs/sources/drill-down-metrics/index.md

---
labels:
  products:
    - cloud
    - enterprise
    - oss
title: Drill down your metrics
weight: 30
refs:
  get-started:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/explore/simplified-exploration/metrics/get-started/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/visualizations/simplified-exploration/metrics/get-started/
---

# Drill down your metrics

> Drill down into your metrics to gain insight into your data without writing a query. First, filter metrics to appear in the **Metrics Drilldown** dashboard. Then, perform an in-depth analysis of selected metrics.

Reviewer: It feels like the word "dashboard" might be misleading.

Perhaps something more along these lines?

```suggestion
Drill down into your metrics to gain insight into your data without writing a query. First, filter the metrics surfaced by **Metrics Drilldown**. Then, select a metric to perform in-depth analysis.
```

> ## Filter the Metrics Drilldown dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Filtering metrics in Metrics Drilldown
```

> To begin drilling down your data, filter the metrics that appear in the **Metrics Drilldown** dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin drilling down your data, filter the metrics that appear in **Metrics Drilldown**.
```

1. Navigate to the **Metrics Drilldown** page in Grafana. Refer to [Get started with Grafana Metrics Drilldown](ref:get-started).
1. From the **Data source** dropdown, select a data source to view related metrics. Supported data sources include Prometheus and Prometheus-compatible data sources.

     A dashboard of metrics for your selected data source appears.
1. (Optional) Select a label name from the **Filter by label values** dropdown. Then, follow the prompts to complete your filter criteria.

     {{< admonition type="note" >}}
      You can apply multiple filters to your metrics.
     {{< /admonition >}}
1. (Optional) To search for metrics, type keywords in the search bar under **Search metrics**.
1. Use the time picker to select a date and time range from the dropdown menu, or use an absolute time range.
1. Click the down arrow next to the **Refresh** icon to set a refresh rate from the drop-down menu. The default refresh status is **Off**.

> The **Metrics Drilldown** dashboard adjusts to reflect your selected filters. To review the steps in your journey, use the **History** breadcrumbs at the top of the dashboard, as shown in the following screenshot.

Reviewer 2: Has the history feature been removed for G12?

Reviewer 3: The history component has been removed, this is correct. Now users can use their browser back button to navigate through their interactions. 

[PR for removing history here](https://github.com/grafana/metrics-drilldown/pull/221)

![show metrics explore overview](/media/metrics-explore/metrics-drilldown-overview.png)

## Analyze selected metrics

> After filtering the metrics in the **Metrics Drilldown** dashboard, you can further drill down into selected metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After filtering the metrics in **Metrics Drilldown**, you can further drill down into selected metrics.
```

1. From the **Metrics Drilldown** dashboard, locate the metric you want to drill down.
1. From the upper-right corner of the metric's dashboard panel, click **Select**, as shown in the following screenshot.

    ![show select box](/media/metrics-explore/select-metric.png)

A detailed view of the metric opens that shows the following details:

> - An overview of the metric that includes a description, as well as the metric's type and unit. You can filter by label using the **Filter by label values** dropdown.

Reviewer: The **Overview** tab has been removed, so that we can fast-track users to the **Breakdown** tab.

```suggestion
```

![show metrics drilldown main page with filters highlighted](/media/metrics-explore/metrics-drilldown-filters.png)

## Apply advanced filters

Apply advanced filters to further refine the metrics that appear in Metrics Drilldown. Access the following advanced filters from the left-side menu of the Metrics Drilldown app.

| Filter type     | Description                                                                                                       |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Rules filters   | Filter metrics based on whether they use recording or alerting rules.                                             |
| Prefix filters   | Filter metrics based on their name prefix in the Prometheus namespace. Multiple selected prefixes use "OR" logic. |
| Suffix filters  | Filter metrics based on their name suffix. Multiple selected suffixes use "OR" logic.                             |
| Group by labels | Group metrics by their label values.                                                                              |

{{< admonition type="note" >}}

> Multiple selections for a filter apply "OR" logic, but selections between filters apply "AND" logic. For example, if you apply two prefix filters and one suffix filter, metrics that contain either prefix and the suffix appear. {{< /admonition >}}

Reviewer 4: It is probably better to give an exact example here. One example can be: at the very beginning, users select both envoy and kafka from prefix filter, and the total metric count is the sum of metrics with either a prefix or envoy or kafka. After that, users select the count suffix. The metrics will reduced to the suffix with only _count.

## Analyze selected metrics

> 

Reviewer 4: one thing missing from the feature set is the Sort function: currently the Default will put the most recent metrics users have selected to the top. More details can be found [here](https://raintank-corp.slack.com/archives/C0630AYC4SY/p1745356189085099)
